There is a rapid increase in scientific studies on the environmental and health effects of microplastics and nanoplastics (MNPs), with potential to inform risk assessment. However, regulatory uptake of scientific evidence depends on the reliability and relevance, often referred to as the regulatory adequacy, of the studies. This regulatory adequacy may be challenged by, for example, insufficient characterization of test materials, and lack of transparency and reporting in experimental setup, methods, and analytics. While frameworks exist for evaluating the regulatory adequacy of (eco)toxicity data for chemicals and nanomaterials, they do not fully account for the unique characteristics and challenges associated with MNPs. Therefore, there is a need to provide further guidance specifically tailored to MNP studies. The aim of this paper was to review and synthesize the state of knowledge regarding key physicochemical parameters and experimental considerations critical to evaluating the regulatory adequacy, defined in terms of reliability and relevance, of MNP (eco)toxicity studies. Building on this comparative review, existing criteria were identified, adapted and aligned to support the development of structured tools embedded within the SciRAP and CRED frameworks. A literature review revealed the importance of, for example, polymer identity, size and shape distribution, surface chemistry, additive content, dispersion behaviour, background contamination control, description of sample preparation, and characterization of the test item. Based on these findings, relevant criteria were identified from existing frameworks and literature and subsequently adapted or extended and built into the SciRAP and CRED frameworks, to address the specific challenges of MNP research, supporting structured evaluation of study reliability and relevance. By promoting better reporting practices and attention to MNPs specific test considerations, the proposed frameworks, SciRAPplastic (in vivo and in vitro) and plasticCRED (ecotoxicity), can strengthen the scientific foundation for environmental and health risk assessments of MNPs. Furthermore, they may support the regulatory uptake of data generated in emerging non-standard MNP (eco)toxicity studies.

There is a rapid increase in scientific studies on the environmental and health effects of microplastics and nanoplastics (MNPs), with potential to inform

Microplastics and Nanoplastics - There is a rapid increase in scientific studies on the environmental and health effects of microplastics and nanoplastics (MNPs), with potential to inform risk...

scope Submit manuscript SciRAPplastic and plasticCRED: tailoring existing tools to assess micro- and nanoplastics (eco)toxicity studies Download PDF Ida Due Anna Beronius Anders Baun Nanna B. Hartmann Show authors 691 Accesses Explore all metrics This article has been updated Abstract There is a rapid increase in scientific studies on the environmental and health effects of microplastics and nanoplastics (MNPs), with potential to inform risk assessment. However, regulatory uptake of scientific evidence depends on the reliability and relevance, often referred to as the regulatory adequacy, of the studies. This regulatory adequacy may be challenged by, for example, insufficient characterization of test materials, and lack of transparency and reporting in experimental setup, methods, and analytics. While frameworks exist for evaluating the regulatory adequacy of (eco)toxicity data for chemicals and nanomaterials, they do not fully account for the unique characteristics and challenges associated with MNPs. Therefore, there is a need to provide further guidance specifically tailored to MNP studies. The aim of this paper was to review and synthesize the state of knowledge regarding key physicochemical parameters and experimental considerations critical to evaluating the regulatory adequacy, defined in terms of reliability and relevance, of MNP (eco)toxicity studies. Building on this comparative review, existing criteria were identified, adapted and aligned to support the development of structured tools embedded within the SciRAP and CRED frameworks. A literature review revealed the importance of, for example, polymer identity, size and shape distribution, surface chemistry, additive content, dispersion behaviour, background contamination control, description of sample preparation, and characterization of the test item. Based on these findings, relevant criteria were identified from existing frameworks and literature and subsequently adapted or extended and built into the SciRAP and CRED frameworks, to address the specific challenges of MNP research, supporting structured evaluation of study reliability and relevance. By promoting better reporting practices and attention to MNPs specific test considerations, the proposed frameworks, SciRAPplastic (in vivo and in vitro) and plasticCRED (ecotoxicity), can strengthen the scientific foundation for environmental and health risk assessments of MNPs. Furthermore, they may support the regulatory uptake of data generated in eme Abstract The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Similar content being viewed by others Challenges in human micro- and nanoplastic risk assessment: stocktaking and the road ahead Article Open access 08 April 2026 Health impacts of micro- and nanoplastics in humans: systematic review of in vivo evidence Article Open access 27 February 2026 Health impacts of micro- and nanoplastics: key influencing factors, limitations, and future perspectives Article 10 December 2025 Explore related subjects Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. Chemical Safety Chemistry Policy Ecotoxicology Environmental Law Toxicology Environmental Chemistry Microplastic Pollution in Aquatic Ecosystems Introduction Plastics are versatile materials composed of polymers, residual monomers, and a wide range of chemical additives, such as plasticizers, flame retardants, and stabilizers [ ]. It has been estimated that over 16,000 chemicals may be detected in plastics or directly used in plastic production, of which more than 4,200 are considered of concern due to their persistence, bioaccumulation, mobility, and/or toxicity (PBMT) [ ]. During and after their intended use, plastics undergo different types of transformation like degradation and fragmentation through processes such as photodegradation, due to UV-exposure, and mechanical abrasion. This leads to the ongoing formation of secondary MNPs, varying in size, shape, and chemical composition [ Scientific interest in MNPs has grown rapidly over the past decade, with a surge in publications across disciplines [ ]. In parallel, MNPs are gaining political and regulatory attention internationally [ ]. In March 2022 the UN Environment Assembly (UNEA) adopted a historic resolution to establish a global and legally binding instrument on plastic pollution [ ]. In response, an Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) commenced its work in the second half of 2022, with the ambition of concluding treaty negotiations by the end of 2024. However, despite several negotiation rounds, the August 2025 session closed without consensus, and the process remains ongoing [ ]. These efforts reflect growing momentum, among many parties to address the full life cycle of plastics, including MNPs, through legally binding commitments. They also illustrate the complexity of addressing plastic pollution, highlighting the critical need for coordinated international action and enforcea