This protocol provides details for dispersion and colloidal characterization of suspended engineered nanomaterials, and computational fate and transport modeling to accurately calculate dose metrics for in vitro cellular nanotoxicology experiments. Evidence continues to grow of the importance of in vitro and in vivo dosimetry in the hazard assessment and ranking of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs). Accurate dose metrics are particularly important for in vitro cellular screening to assess the potential health risks or bioactivity of ENMs. To ensure meaningful and reproducible quantification of in vitro dose, with consistent measurement and reporting between laboratories, it is necessary to adopt standardized and integrated methodologies for (i) generation of stable ENM suspensions in cell culture media; (ii) colloidal characterization of suspended ENMs, particularly of properties that determine particle kinetics in an in vitro system (size distribution and formed agglomerate effective density); and (iii) robust numerical fate and transport modeling for accurate determination of the ENM dose delivered to cells over the course of the in vitro exposure. Here we present an integrated comprehensive protocol based on such a methodology for in vitro dosimetry, including detailed standardized procedures for each of these three critical aims. The entire protocol requires ∼6–12 h to complete.

This protocol provides details for dispersion and colloidal characterization of suspended engineered nanomaterials, and computational fate and transport modeling to accurately calculate dose metrics for in vitro cellular nanotoxicology experiments.

Nature Protocols - This protocol provides details for dispersion and colloidal characterization of suspended engineered nanomaterials, and computational fate and transport modeling to accurately...

Abstract Evidence continues to grow of the importance of in vitro and in vivo dosimetry in the hazard assessment and ranking of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs). Accurate dose metrics are particularly important for in vitro cellular screening to assess the potential health risks or bioactivity of ENMs. To ensure meaningful and reproducible quantification of in vitro dose, with consistent measurement and reporting between laboratories, it is necessary to adopt standardized and integrated methodologies for (i) generation of stable ENM suspensions in cell culture media; (ii) colloidal characterization of suspended ENMs, particularly of properties that determine particle kinetics in an in vitro system (size distribution and formed agglomerate effective density); and (iii) robust numerical fate and transport modeling for accurate determination of the ENM dose delivered to cells over the course of the in vitro exposure. Here we present an integrated comprehensive protocol based on such a methodology for in vitro dosimetry, including detailed standardized procedures for each of these three critical aims. The entire protocol requires 6–12 h to complete. Access through your institution Buy or subscribe This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution Access options Access through your institution Access Nature and 54 other Nature Portfolio journals Get Nature+, our best-value online-access subscription $32.99 / 30 days cancel any time Learn more Subscribe to this journal Receive 12 print issues and online access $259.00 per year only $21.58 per issue Learn more Buy this article Purchase on SpringerLink Instant access to the full article PDF. USD 39.95 Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout Additional access options: Log in Learn about institutional subscriptions Read our FAQs Contact customer support Figure 1: Harvard dispersion dosimetry protocol (HDDP). The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Figure 2: ENM dispersion protocol. The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Figure 3: Volumetric centrifugation method (VCM). The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Figure 4: Determination of DSE value. The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Figure 5: Volume size distribution. The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Figure 6: Fate and Transport modeling results. The alternative te Scope Journal Information Testimonials from authors About the Editors Editorial policies Editorial input and checks Editorial Values Statement Journal Metrics Publishing model Web Feeds Contact Webcasts Posters protocols.io Journal Credits Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team Publish with us For Authors For Reviewers Language editing services Submit manuscript Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All journals This journal Search Advanced search Quick links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies Nature Protocols Nat Protoc ISSN 1750-2799 (online) ISSN 1754-2189 (print) nature.com footer links About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject protocols.io Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author & Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries & institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media kits Branded content Professional development Nature Awards Nature Careers Nature Conferences Regional websites Nature Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Japan Nature Middle East Privacy Policy Use of cookies Your privacy choices/Manage cookies Legal notice Accessibility statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy rights © 2026 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Translational Research newsletter — top stories in biotechnology, drug discovery and pharma. Email address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy Close banner Close Get what matters in translational research, free to your inbox weekly. Sign up for Nature Briefing: Translational Research