A new approach is presented for analysis of microplastics in environmental samples, based on selective fluorescent staining using Nile Red (NR), followed by density-based extraction and filtration. The dye adsorbs onto plastic surfaces and renders them fluorescent when irradiated with blue light. Fluorescence emission is detected using simple photography through an orange filter. Image-analysis allows fluorescent particles to be identified and counted. Magnified images can be recorded and tiled to cover the whole filter area, allowing particles down to a few micrometres to be detected. The solvatochromic nature of Nile Red also offers the possibility of plastic categorisation based on surface polarity characteristics of identified particles. This article details the development of this staining method and its initial cross-validation by comparison with infrared (IR) microscopy. Microplastics of different sizes could be detected and counted in marine sediment samples. The fluorescence staining identified the same particles as those found by scanning a filter area with IR-microscopy.

Scientific Reports - A rapid-screening approach to detect and quantify microplastics based on fluorescent tagging with Nile Red

Abstract A new approach is presented for analysis of microplastics in environmental samples, based on selective fluorescent staining using Nile Red (NR), followed by density-based extraction and filtration. The dye adsorbs onto plastic surfaces and renders them fluorescent when irradiated with blue light. Fluorescence emission is detected using simple photography through an orange filter. Image-analysis allows fluorescent particles to be identified and counted. Magnified images can be recorded and tiled to cover the whole filter area, allowing particles down to a few micrometres to be detected. The solvatochromic nature of Nile Red also offers the possibility of plastic categorisation based on surface polarity characteristics of identified particles. This article details the development of this staining method and its initial cross-validation by comparison with infrared (IR) microscopy. Microplastics of different sizes could be detected and counted in marine sediment samples. The fluorescence staining identified the same particles as those found by scanning a filter area with IR-microscopy. Similar content being viewed by others A new approach to classifying polymer type of microplastics based on Faster-RCNN-FPN and spectroscopic imagery under ultraviolet light Article Open access 12 February 2024 A novel method for extraction, quantification, and identification of microplastics in CreamType of cosmetic products Article Open access 10 September 2021 A general strategy to develop fluorogenic polymethine dyes for bioimaging Article Open access 27 November 2023 Introduction Plastic litter, both at the macro and micro scale, is widespread and has accumulated worldwide in the marine environment. Due to ultraviolet (UV) radiation, oxidation and mechanical forces, plastic items break down into increasingly smaller microplastic fragments, below 5 mm in diameter . Micro-sized fragments such as synthetic fibres from textiles, facial cleansers and many other products also introduce microplastics directly . This has led to a build-up of microplastics of varying sizes, composed of different polymer types, across a wide array of marine habitats. Because of their size, microplastics are available and ingested by a broad range of organisms , possibly threatening ecosystems and even human health . The risks that microplastics pose to marine life and humans are widely recognized and have been included in national and international marine protection strategies, policies and legislati