The ubiquitous occurrence of microplastics in ecosystems and living organisms is an emerging issue of health concern, yet robust risk assessment is limited by the absence of standardized analytical methods. We developed a pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry protocol for the monitoring of polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, polymethyl methacrylate, and polycarbonate in environmental samples. For calibration, we employed polymer-specific solvent systems, including dichloromethane for polymethyl methacrylate and polycarbonate, tetrahydrofuran for polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride, and toluene for polyethylene and polypropylene. Results on spiked soil matrices showed 78.7–90.1% analytical recovery and polymer quantification limits ranging from 0.014 µg to 0.29 µg.

The ubiquitous occurrence of microplastics in ecosystems and living organisms is an emerging issue of health concern, yet robust risk assessment is limited

Environmental Chemistry Letters - The ubiquitous occurrence of microplastics in ecosystems and living organisms is an emerging issue of health concern, yet robust risk assessment is limited by the...

scope Submit manuscript Yanting Wang Siyuan Jing Ke Wang Yinjuan Chen Kashif Hayat Thomas C. Wanger Weiping Liu ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-1173-892X Show authors 670 Accesses Explore all metrics Abstract The ubiquitous occurrence of microplastics in ecosystems and living organisms is an emerging issue of health concern, yet robust risk assessment is limited by the absence of standardized analytical methods. We developed a pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry protocol for the monitoring of polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, polymethyl methacrylate, and polycarbonate in environmental samples. For calibration, we employed polymer-specific solvent systems, including dichloromethane for polymethyl methacrylate and polycarbonate, tetrahydrofuran for polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride, and toluene for polyethylene and polypropylene. Results on spiked soil matrices showed 78.7–90.1% analytical recovery and polymer quantification limits ranging from 0.014 µg to 0.29 µg. This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution to check access. Access this article Log in via an institution Subscribe and save Springer+ from $39.99 /Month Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals Cancel anytime View plans Buy Now Buy article PDF USD 39.95 Price excludes VAT (USA) Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout. Instant access to the full article PDF. Institutional subscriptions Fig. 1 The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Fig. 2 The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Fig. 3 The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Fig. 4 The alternative text for this image may have been generated using AI. Similar content being viewed by others Quantification of microplastics in environmental samples via pressurized liquid extraction and pyrolysis-gas chromatography Article 30 August 2019 Identification and quantification of common microplastics in table salts by a multi-technique-based analytical method Article 20 July 2022 Study on the Pyrolysis Characteristics and Kinetics of Plastic Solid Waste Article 01 April 2025 Explore related subjects Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. Biomethanol Gas chromatography Mass Spectrometry Polymer Synthesis Polymers Solid-phase microextraction Microplastic Po